CS6510 Fall 2018
TJ Nielsen
Jingpeng Tang, Ph.D.

Course Information
Analyzes current topics in operating systems design and simulation. Covers modem computer architecture; several types of memory management; current scheduling algorithms for multiple processes; disc management; virtual memory and inter-process communication. This course introduces students to concepts involved with constructing an operating system. It builds on materials covered in operating system theory, computer architecture, compiler theory, software engineering, and software quality assurance and testing.  Students will be required to design, implement and test their own operating system over a virtual machine. Classroom discussion will focus on practical realities in designing and building an operating system.

Topics to be covered include: 

Process management
Memory management
Scheduling
Virtual Memory
Inter-process communication
Threads
Disk Management
etc. 
Related Outcomes
Outcome C-1: Graduates are proficient in using data structures and algorithms. They understand how to implement them, when to apply them, and the abstractions associated with their use.

Outcome C-2: Graduates understand the foundations of computer architecture.

Outcome C-3: Graduates have proficiency in the mathematical skills needed in computer science (viz. discrete mathematics, basic probability and statistics, basic differential and integral calculus).

Outcome CS-1: Graduates can develop solutions to significant computing problems.

Outcome CS-2: Graduates understand the theoretical foundations of computation.

Outcome CS-3: Graduates understand the principles and components of operating systems.

Course Outcomes
At the completion of this course, students should be able to

Build an operating system on a virtual machine.
Create a design for an operating system.
Explain how the main components of an operating system work.
Explain how the operating system works with the simulated machine.
Explain the fundamental principles of operating systems
Evaluate how the operating system works together with its several parts.
Manage large project using software engineering approach.
Apply software quality assurance and testing on large project.
 Text Books
Required:

(1) Operating System Concepts, Abraham Silberschatz, Peter Baer Galvin, Greg Gagne, Ninth Edition, ISBN: 978-1-118-06333-0

Reference Books:

(1) Structured Computer Organization, Andrew S. Tanenbaum, sixth Edition, ISBN-13: 978-0132916523

(2) Software Engineering A Practitioner’s Approach, Roger S. Pressman, Bruce R. Maxim, Eighth Edition, ISBN 978-0-07-802212-8.

(3) Software Testing, Ron Patton, Second  Edition, Sams Books, ISBN-13, 9780672327988

 Course Procedures
The course will partially follow a scrum process model to develop a large project. The course will include presentations, in-class programming demonstrations and exercises, class discussions, and think-aloud design sessions. Class time will be devoted to discussing key concepts in operating systems, clearing up questions from previous class sessions, providing a forum for discussion of critical issues, and reviewing solutions to in-class exercises and programming assignments. Periodically we will break up into small groups to work on OS design exercises.

 Course Philosophy
“You cannot teach a man anything; you can only help him find it within himself.”

   -- Galileo

“All truly wise thoughts have been thought already thousands of times; but to make them truly ours, we must think them over again honestly, till they take root in our personal experience.”  -- Goethe

 This is your education. I am here to help. This puts the primary responsibility for learning on your shoulders. Your learning will be significantly enhanced if you

Read the assigned reading material prior to coming to class.
Take the time to experiment with concepts discussed in class.
Get involved in classroom discussion.
Apply what you learn to each programming assignment as we go along. You should expect to write 300 to 500 lines of code weekly. 
Keep up with class assignments.
 Use of Computers
Programming assignments for this course require access to computers in the CS labs, or a home computer loaded with equivalent software. You are free to use one of the three programming language you wish, C++, Java, C#. However, I won’t be able to help you much if you use a language that I am relatively unfamiliar with. 

The lab is not responsible for network or hard disk failure, so you will want to back up your projects. 

Based on the authorization of the UVSC Lab Fee Committee, the CS department is authorized to charge every student registered in any CS course a lab fee. This fee is used to partially defer the significant costs of providing computer labs for student use.

Attendance
I do not take attendance in class. However, it is very difficult to master the concepts discussed in class if you do not attend class on a regular basis. 

Programming Project(s)
In this course majority part of your grade will be based on the programming projects. You are free to choose one of the three major computer language, C++, Java, or C#. Make a decision before you start the first milestone then stick with it throughout the semester. Your performance on programming projects will be measured as follows:

Programs must meet specifications.
Programs must be turned in on time.
See grading criteria for specifics
This class has eight programming assignments. Assignments are graded for full credit up to the assignment submission deadline. This deadline is 11:59 pm in the due date. After that time, the assignment will lose 20% per day the submission is late. If Canvas says you submitted your assignment at 12:00am, you will be graded one day late. The only exception to this rule is when you contact me 24 hours before the assignment submission deadline and request an extension. You get one extension for this term.

In this course you will be working alone developing your OS. However, you are allowed to discuss with your classmates in and out the classroom, you are not allowed to share code, nor are you allowed to use any code from the internet, without express written permission from the instructor. Because of the integrated nature of the Operating System, and the emphasis on this project for your grade, violations of this policy will probably result in failure of the course.

 Exams
There will be a final presentation.

 Students with Disabilities
If you have any disability that may impair your ability to successfully complete this course, please contact the Accessibility Services Department. Academic accommodations are granted for all students who have qualified and documented disabilities. These services are coordinated with the student and the instructor by the Accessibility Services Department. I won’t accept any disability waivers until I receive proper documentation.

 Tentative Schedule 
Week

Topics

Due Dates

1

Introduction to simulated machine

 

2

Operating System Shell

Milestone 1

3

Intra-process memory management

 

4

Inter-process communication

Milestone 2

5

Kernel thread

 

6

Process thread

Milestone 3

7

Multi-process scheduling algorithms and metrics

 

8

Global memory management

Milestone 4

9

Virtual Memory part 1

 

10

Virtual Memory part 2

Milestone 5

11

Disc management: whole disc

 

12

Disc management: interface

Milestone 6

13

File system part 1

 

14

Thanksgiving

Milestone 7

15

File system part 2

 

16

Final presentation

Milestone 8

17

Final presentation

 

Grading
Evaluation of your achievement of the course objectives will be based on the following:

 

Final Presentation           100

Programming Projects    600

Total                                700

   

Final grades will be assigned on the following scale:

93% and above  

A

90% - 92%

A-

87% - 89%

B+

83% - 86%

B

80% - 82%

B-

77% - 79%

C+

73% - 76%

C

70% - 72%

C-

67% - 69%

D+

63% - 66%

D

60% - 62%

D-

less than 60%

E

Policies
All Utah Valley University policies for students are apply.
